---
layout: post
title: Tihai in Indian music
---

The rhythmic aspect of Indian classical music uses cycles of a fixed  number of beats. Familiar Western analogs are rhythmic accompaniments to 12-bar Blues, which repeat in 12-bar cycle, each played in 4/4 time.

One unique thing I've seen in Indian music is the concept of a *Tihai*. There are many variations, but the most popular variant refers to  playing a rhythmic phrase, that, when repeated precisely three times,  lands you on the beginning of the next cycle.

For instance, consider the 16-beat *Teen Taal*:

<pre>
Dha | Dhin | Dhin | Dha
Dha | Dhin | Dhin | Dha
Dha | Tin  | Tin  | Ta
Ta  | Dhin | Dhin | Dha
</pre>

 And an example *Tihai* (in **bold**). My hacky notation can be read as follows:
 
 * Pipe (`|`) delimits single beats.
 * When needed, I use slashes (`/`) on top to divide the beat into equal parts
   and then to distribute them among the notes to be played in that beat.


<pre>
Dha      | Dhin     | Dhin      | Dha
Dha      | Dhin     | Dhin      | Dha
// //      / / / /                // //
<b>DhaDha   | TiReKeTe | Dha       | DhaDha
/ / / /               // //       / / / /
TiReKeTe | Dha      | DhaDha    | TiReKeTe
----
Dha</b>      | Dhin     | Dhin      | Dha
...
</pre>


 Note how:

- The *Tihai* starts halfway (after the 8th beat, i.e., on the 9th beat)
- The 3-beat phrase **{DhaDha}{TiReKeTe}{Dha}** (each {} takes one beat) repeats
  three times, for a total of 9 beats.
- Since we only have space for 8 beats in this cycle, the last beat starts the
  next cycle

 

The first beat of the cycle is known as *Sam*, and is the highest emotional
point of the cycle*.* When one emphasizes the landing on *Sam* properly, the
*Tihai* serves to temporarily distort the listener's rhythmic perception only to
resolve it at the *Sam*.

Here's me speaking and playing this *Tihai* on the Tabla:

<iframe width="431" height="766" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/wVhaVJNXBt0" title="Simple Teen Taal Tihai" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Rhythm math

Let:

* $$N$$ be the number of beats in the *Tihai* phrase. The one above had $$N=3$$.
* $$T$$ be the number of beats in the *Taal* chosen. e.g., $$T=16$$ for *Teen Taal*.
* Let $$q$$ be the beat number that should start the *Tihai*, $$1 \le q \le T$$.
  In the above example, $$q=9$$, since we started on the 9th beat in the cycle.

If we are to play the $$N$$-beat phrase 3 times and land on the beginning of a
rhythmic cycle, we must have:

$$3N = 1\mod{T-q+1}$$

In the preceding example, we have all the values match up ($$N=3$$, $$q=9$$,
$$T=16$$):


$$3 \times 3 = 1\mod{\left(16-9+1 = 8\right)}$$

Here's another example of a *Tihai* which starts on the first beat, and is 11
beats long (first 11 beats <u>underlined</u>, the entire *Tihai* is
**emboldened**):

<pre>
<b>
// //      / / / /    // / /    / / //
<u>DhaDha</u>   | <u>TiReKiTa</u> | <u>DhaTiRe</u> | <u>KiTaDha</u>
//  //                // //     // //
<u>DhinNa</u>   | <u>Dha</u>      | <u>DhaDhin</u> | <u>Na Dha</u>
// //      //  //                // //
<u>xx Dha</u>   | <u>DhinNa</u>   | <u>Dha</u>     | DhaDha
/ / / /    // / /     / / //    //  //
TiReKiTa | DhaTiRe  | KiTaDha | DhinNa
-----
////       // //      // //      // //
Dha      | DhaDhin  | Na Dha   | xx Dha
//  //                // //     / / / /
DhinNa   | Dha      | DhaDha  | TiReKiTa
// / /     / / //     //  //    
DhaTiRe  | KiTaDha  | DhinNa  | Dha
// //      // //      // //       //  //
DhaDhin  | Na Dha   | xx Dha    | DhinNa
-----
Dha</b>  | Dhin ...
</pre>

Note how this 11-beat phrase, when played 3 times, gives us a piece of 33 beats,
which is 2 full 16-beat cycles, and the extra beat that starts the next one.
This shows that *Tihai*s need not complete within a cycle -- they can span
multiple cycles, the only requirement seems to be to land on the *Sam* after 3
repetitions.

Here, $$N=11$$, $$q=1$$ and $$T=16$$, and we can see that:

$$3N = 3 \times 11 = 33$$

$$ = 1 \mod{16} $$

$$ = 1 \mod{16 - 1 + 1} $$

$$= 1 \mod{T-q+1}$$

## Generalization?

I have only ever heard this concept applied to 3x repetitions of fixed phrases
(after all, the name *Tihai* does hint at 3's). But out of curiosity, what if we
want to generalize this to a $$K$$-way repetition? e.g., we could invent a
*Panchai* or something such that a fixed phrase, when repeated 5 times, has to
end on the *Sam* of a rhythmic cycle.

The simple calculations above should generalize to give us:

$$K \times N = 1\mod{T-q+1}$$

To jam with this idea with $$K=5$$, $$q=1$$ and $$T=16$$, we need an $$N$$ such
that:

$$5N = 1\mod{16}$$

```python
>>> [n for n in range(50) if (5*n) % 16 == 1]
[13, 29, 45]
```

So there, our first option is a 13-beat phrase. When repeated 5 times, this will
be 65 beats, which is 4 cycles of 16 beats and our extra beat to start the next
cycle.

Do let me know if such a generalization exists, or if there is maybe some reason
why artists choose not to incorporate it. I for one can see that there is
something magical about the number 3 -- it is an odd number that I, as a
listener, seem to be able to keep in my head easily. Maybe 5, 7 or higher odd
numbers are just too complex? Maybe they just don't sound good? I don't know.
